Here's an example of a business scenario when
a Product Manager would need to ensure that instrumentation is added to a feature.
In this scenario, a company is launching a walkthrough to help onboard new users.
The walkthrough is a basic popover that contains
three slides with information on how the app functions.
If they want to navigate through the slides,
a user can click on next button,
and there's a button to return to previous slides.
At any point, a user can click an X to close out the module.
Finally, the user sees a complete button on the last slide,
which they can use to close the pop-up module.
Here is the question for you.
What information would be important for a product manager to capture
in order to know whether this new onboarding module is successful?
To know whether the walk through module is successful,
a product manager needs to ensure data is collected,
such as acquisition metrics on which users saw that onboarding module.
This means knowing which user IDs were exposed to the walk through module.
It also means tracking information that might
change about a user from session to session,
such as their device type and operating system.
Next, we need to know if a customer truly use the walk through feature.
Since every new user sees the walk through,
but can leave at any time.
This will mean instrumenting to understand how a given user interacted with the module.
For example, recording events so that you can
calculate the time a user spent on each of the three slides.
This can be accomplished by tracking the time each next slide button is clicked.
Note here that you should avoid
the anti-pattern of doing something automatically for a user.
If the slides transitioned without the user taking
action and you only track the page view time,
there would be no way to distinguish,
if a user had taken an action and actively interacted with the feature.
It is always important to know,
whether and when the user consciously chose to do something.
To know which customers made use of the onboarding module,
understanding the average length of time is spent in the entire module will be important.
By tracking when a customer closes the module,
either via the x or complete button,
you will later be able to see whether a given customer
actually spent time reading and interacting with the Onboarding.
Collecting this data on user acquisition and activation of the feature,
enables Product managers to know how a customer use the walk through feature.
Success won't just be measured by the percent of new users who interact with the module.
However, but by considering retention and revenue metrics.
In the case of an onboarding module,
product managers wouldn't need to add any new instrumentation,
to see if the user's interest in the feature is retained.
The module is only seen one time by users,
so retention isn't relevant for this particular feature.
The product managers wouldn't need to add
any new instrumentation in the revenue side either,
since the Onboarding walk through feature does not generate any revenue directly.
While the feature doesn't need additional retention and revenue instrumentation,
calculating retention and revenue of customers at the product level,
is highly relevant when considering if the feature was a success.
By adding instrumentation that allows us to know if a customer
truly read the walk through versus speeding through or closing out the walk through,
we know whether any given customer made use of the feature
and that gives us the power to compare feature usage to our KPIs.
For example, is user satisfaction
different in the first week for onboarding module users?
Is the user features highlighted in the walk through
higher with walk through module users than users who skipped the module?
Are users who actually read the onboarding module, retained longer?
By instrumenting the Onboarding module well,
all of these important KPIs can be calculated and the success of the feature measured.